draft responses to Lakens (#99)
aaronpeikert/bayes-prereg: reviews/methods1.Rmd

---
output:
  pdf_document: default
  html_document: default
---

All changes of the manuscript since this review can be viewed on GitHub:

<https://github.com/aaronpeikert/bayes-prereg/compare/v0.2.0...main#diff-a9a4aad3fa8c9c10c5404b632bc3a01a25d2d8430eb932bc35c76769963e4b70>

Our responses to the review are formatted as follows.

Normal text = the reviewer's comment

> Indented text = our response

> *Indented italicized = quote from the revised paper*

Reviewer #1: The authors set out to explain what the primary aim of preregistration is.
I think they are correct that many scientists have hardly thought about this question.
This is not in itself bad - preregistration intuitively makes sense - but it is important to clearly articulate what the aim of preregistration is.

> We agree that any tool applied thoughtlessly will seldom be effective.

> > A clear aim of preregistration could be helpfull to shape its application, especially given that the scientific comunity is still in an experimenting phase around central issues of preregistration, e.g., what level of detail a preregistration should have, under what circumstances to deviate from it, how to review it, or how to deal with exploratory research questions.

Reviewer: I simply would put "we agree". 
There is no reason to start new discussions on the few points we agree upon.

Author: Ok

So I applaud the authors for believing this is important.
At the same time, their arguments were, I believe, not always equally convincing, and they do not adequately discuss the existing literature.

> > To not adequately cite Laken's work was a grave and frankly embarrassing mistake that we regret and did without intention.

Author: I now put in:

> We thank the reviewer for pointing out that we failed to include opposing philosophical perspectives.
> We are now citing Laken's and Mayo's positions and relate them to our perspective.

The distribution (or the move to a Bayesian rationalization) does not add anything (although of course it can be added).

> We find that it adds value by making an otherwise implicit process explicit to the point of calculatable.
> By conceptualising uncertainty with a specific distribution, we rid ourselves of vague notions of transparency, control, or exploration.
> This is of utmost importance because only this clarity enables us to effectively navigate the tradeoffs involved.

Importantly, the likelihood function of course also underlies the uniformly most powerful test in a Neyman-Pearson hypothesis testing framework.
So for a frequentist (and I mean a frequentist not in statistical terms, but also in Popperian anti-Bayesian view on confirmation) the same argument for preregistration plays a role.

> We agree that this argument could perhaps be made for a frequentist as well.
> However, it is not the math of the likelihood ratio that eludes us; it is how a significant result of a statistical test changes how a frequentist judges a hypothesis.
> There is a great, yet unresolved, debate in frequentism about how to do just this.

> > In a Fisherian approach, no heat is paid to the power of a test; only the p-value is interpreted as the strength of evidence against the null.

Reviewer: Would it make sense to put an overview over these different philosophical positions in the manuscript?

After p-hacking, we could get a very high likelihood (or Bayes factor) that supports H1 - but it was cherry-picked, and is highly likely to be a fluke.
Therefore, the authors limit themselves to relative likelihoods.

> We did not limit ourselves to relative liklihoods.
> We explicitly include both the "firmness" and "increase in firmness" perspective.
> That a firmness perspective has significant flaws is of no matter to our argument since we intend to show that someone who subscribes to either must be more persuaded by a preregistered study.

They point out that, assuming people only increase their alpha level when p-hacking, preregistration leads to tests with a lower alpha level.
As such, they basically restate Mayo's (2018) argument about the severity of a test.

> Let us cite <https://doi.org/10.3758/s13423-022-02069-1> "Nowhere in Mayo’s severity principle or in the specifications discussed below is the riskiness or specificity of a hypothesis, and the predictions it makes, incorporated as a requirement for a severe test (Meehl, 1978; 1986; 1990b, a; Roberts & Pashler, 2000)."

However, they never make this explicit, and I think this is to the detriment of the paper.

> > We added a new section that deals with the concept of severity, making it explicit how our approach differs fundamentally.

Reviewer: Please point to this new section, or even better, quote it here.

The fact that they subsequently add a Bayesian sauce to the likelihood ratio (by adding a distribution to the Type 1 error rate when a study is not preregistered, instead of simply making some assumption about a point-value of the inflated Type 1 error rate) does not add anything to their argument.
So, I believe the authors have basically attempted to re-invent Mayo's severity argument.

> The whole second part of the paper deals with the problem of not being able to reduce the theoretical risk to a point estimate.
> The statistical procedure has an objective Type 1 error rate, for which we can come up with a point estimate if we agree on the conditions, which is a starting point for evaluating the theoretical risk of the scientific (!= statistical) procedure.
> Since, a reader does not have access to the whole scientific procedure, they must judge it with uncertainty.

> > We find it important to distentengle the statistical procedure, the scientific procedure, and the outside perspective of the reader.

Reviewer: Can you point to places in the paper, where we explain this already?

Point 1: Preregistration can not objectively minimize uncertainty about the Type 1 error rate The main argument of the authors is that risky predictions create persuasive evidence if they turn out to be correct.
Preregistrations are ideal for communicating the theoretical risk researchers took when testing a claim, and communicating this removes uncertainty in the reader about the theoretical risk the authors took.
I think this argument is in the right direction, but it is not fully developed.
I was somewhat disappointed not to see a discussion of my own paper on a conceptual analysis of the value of preregistration, as I had a similar goal as the authors when I wrote my paper, and my arguments are in the same direction, but dare I say, slightly better developed.

> We find ourselves in a curios position, that perhaps may be summarised as "doing the right thing, for the wrong reasons", i.e., we agree with Laken's conclusions about preregistration but we disagree how to come to these conclusions.
> We take a Bayesian/inductionist view, whereas Lakens takes a frequentist/anti-inductionist view, agreeing on the end result but disagreeing on everything that comes before.

> > While we find it important that readers are aware, how anti-inductionist deal with preregistration, this paper was not meant as an exercise to compare Bayesian justification for preregistration with its frequentist counterpart.

Reviewer: At the same time, I feel it is important to compare these views and as a consequence of this comment, the manuscript should, in the discussion, address this point, that is, these two points of view and cite Laken's work.

However, the authors already say 2 is not always true, as people often need to deviate.
And 1 is also not true.
This is important, because if 1 and 2 are true, then we can not minimize uncertainty about theoretical risk (as the authors argue the goal of preregistration is), because this uncertainty is based on a subjective evaluation.
If you deviate from an analysis plan because you think after looking at the data that you should have excluded some outliers, but this was not specified in the preregistration, as a reader I am left with an evaluation of whether 1) this analysis is a *better* test, and it reduces the possibility of incorrectly claiming there was an effect, because these outliers might make a null effect significant, while they should have been removed, or 2) this analysis is a *worse* test, and the reader believes the choice for this test without the outliers is driven by the nicer results the researcher observed.
The preregistration does not minimize uncertainty about the Type 1 error rate.
For some readers, the deviation increased the Type 1 error rate, and for others it did not.

> > This aligns with our reasoning: Any change should increase uncertainty about the theoretical risk.

Reviewer: I like Laken's example. Couldn't we integrate it into the manuscript? It's probably a common type of deviation and it's easy to understand that there are differences in subjective judgements between readers and authors.

> *We put subjective evaluations at the centre of our considerations; we deal explicitly with researchers who are proponents of some theory (they have higher priors for the theory being true), researchers who suspect confounding variables (they assume lower theoretical risk), or those who remain doubtful if everything relevant was reported (they have higher uncertainty about theoretical risk) or even those who place greater value on incongruent evidence than others (they differ in their confirmation function).*

Preregistration does not give certainty about the theoretical risk, as the authors argue.
It gives more certainty in most cases at best, but it allows others to evaluate it.
This might sound like a subtle difference, but I think it matters.

> Agreed.

The authors might reply that the did not really mean 'minimize uncertainty about the theoretical risk' but mainly meant that readers can judge for themselves what the Type 1 error of a test is (based on their own assumptions about what the most appropriate test is).
In that case, their argument does not differ from mine in Lakens (2019), and the authors should explain what their contribution adds.

> > We took considerable time to put what we meant on paper.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> We took considerable time to put what we meant on paper.
```

We all do. No one cares. Remove this sentence.

At the same time, it has done so in a manner that does not matter at all.
My point here is that the error rate in exploratory research is inflated above alpha% to an unknown extent.
A preregistration might reduce the inflation somewhat.
But the rate is quickly too high so that I wouldn't trust the claim anyway.

> Actually, we think this is one of the strengths of the paper.
> With the mathematical analysis, we show exactly how much uncertainty, theoretical risk, and detectability result in how much confirmation, as seen in Figures 1 and 2.
> The vague intuition of a "[Type 1 error] rate [that] is quickly too high so that I wouldn't trust the claim anyway" is replaced by a clear functional form that enables navigating tradeoffs involving exploration, post-hoc changes or detectability.

If a claim is made with 10% lower Type 1 error rate than it would have been made when it was not preregistered is not useful - because I do not know what the error rate associated with the claim is.

> Our claim is that uncertainty is reduced, not theoretical risk directly.
> We claim that there are exploratory methods with a well-known error rate.

> > For example, a neural network has extreme flexibility in fitting the data closely, yet it is calculatable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> For example, a neural network has extreme flexibility in fitting the data closely, yet it is calculable.
```

But how? Can you add a reference? Do you mean V-C dimension or something related?

Therefore, I do not believe preregistration in exploratory studies is useful, and the authors do not make an argument for it.
We do not want to reduce the error rate inflation in preregistration - we want to control it.

> Somehow, our argument seems to be flipped here.
> An exploratory study has low theoretical risk.
> A preregistered study has low uncertainty about theoretical risk.
> A preregistered exploratory study is more persuasive than a study with the same exploration going on that is not preregistered.

If the error rate is not controlled, I do not know how severely a claim has been tested, and I can not use the claim to decide how to act as a scientist.
The authors seem happy with the fact that preregistration reduces the Type 1 error rate even in an exploratory study.

> No, we are happy with low uncertainty about theoretical risk.
> An exploratory study is in our framework, signified by low theoretical risk (high Type 1 error rate).

But I am not. Only claims with a known error rate are useful in science.

> Exactly. The error rate must be known (readers must be certain about them).

> > It may be high however (=exploratory).

Reviewer: Is it possible to construe an example, where there a two studies. One has low estimated error but high uncertainty, the other one has higher error but very low uncertainty; then on average (over many studies in a cumulative scientific process), it would be more effective to run the study with the higher error? Could one directly put this into a Bayesian reasoning showing that the posterior over hundred(or whatever number) such studies would be narrower in the second case?

If the authors disagree, they should say how an unknown relative decrease in the Type 1 error rate to a final still unknown type 1 error rate is beneficial.

> We have a hard time following this reasoning.

> > Exploratory does not imply that theoretical risk is unknown.

Reviewer: I feel that this remains just a claim of yours without any backup. References?

Point 3: The Type 2 error rate matters as much as the type 1 error rate I do not believe the relationship the authors draw between 'theoretical risk', 'risky predictions', 'evidence', and the 'probability of a hypothesis' is coherent.
I especially disagree with the authors that the posterior probability P(H\|E) is important in preregistration.
The authors say this probability is 'often used directly or indirectly as a measure of confirmation of a hypothesis'.
This is simply not true.
No one discusses posterior probabilities of hypotheses in psychological science.

> Neither is severity as an absolute measure of corroboration a common consideration in empirical psychological work.

> > However, the posterior probability is certainly the most classic measure of absolute confirmation in the philosophy of science.

Reviewer: again, backup of this claim with references?

The authors then discuss an 'increase in firmness'.
Logically, this would be the Bayes factor, not the posterior probability of the hypothesis, that the authors are talking about.
The Bayes factor is a continuous measure of how much we update our belief.
If we want to argue for any function of preregistration from a Bayesian perspective, it must be focused on the Bayes factor.
The authors then say 'If a hypothesis is more probable to begin with, observing evidence in its favor will result in a hypothesis that is more strongly confirmed, all else being equal'.

> > We explicitly consider the whole space of possible measures. From the revised paper:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> We explicitly consider the whole space of possible measures. We tried to clarify this. Quoting From the revised paper:
```

> Later in the paper: *Of course, the assigned probabilities and the distribution $Q$ vary from study to study and researcher to researcher (and even the measure of confirmation), but we can illustrate the effect of uncertainty with an example.*

This statement is not in line with the earlier statement about an 'increase in firmness'.
Of course, if a hypothesis is highly probable (the Stroop effect), any evidence will end up with a higher posterior probability that if the prior probability was low.
But the same evidence would lead to a greater 'increase in firmness' (or a higher Bayes factor) if the prior was lower.
The same data would lead to a much greater update in belief.
The authors dismiss the prior probability of the hypothesis as it 'is nothing our study design can change'.
However, this is not true.
Although the authors only discuss inflating the alpha level in their paper, one function of preregistration is to prevent HARKing, or hypothesizing after the results are true.
Of course, if one comes up with a hypothesis after looking at the data, the 'prior' is 1: We already know the hypothesis will be supported by the data.

> > We included a section called "Hacking, harking, and other harms", which hopefully makes our thinking on these things clearer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> We included a section called "Hacking, harking, and other harms", which hopefully clarifies our position.
```

Reviewer: maybe cite the new paragraph here?

HARKing is a major reason the field has moved towards preregistration, but the term 'HARKing' is not even mentioned in the article.
The reason for this is that the arguments the authors provide can not deal with HARKing.
This is obviously a limitation, compared to existing arguments for preregistration, and it is incorrectly ignored in the article.
As Mayo (2018) explains, the problem with HARKing is that it leads to a non-severe test:
The data have no probability of falsifying the claim.
This error-statistical perspective seems to me to be much more fruitful than a Bayesian approach.

> > As stated above, we come to the same conclusions despite being inductionists.

Reviewer: say exactly where "above".

> > As stated above, we come to the same conclusions despite being inductionists.

Reviewer: Again, we agree that there are different perspectives on inference and statistical testing.
While the math is quite similar, they take fundamentally different positions and interpretations of the objects involved (e.g., probabilities, hypotheses, ...). 
Importantly, we come mostly to the same conclusions as people subscribing to an error-statistical perspective yet we believe that the Bayesian perspective provides a general perspective which does not limit ourselfs to an inductionist perspective.

Reviewer: not sure why "inductionist" was brought up here (we agreed, this is a difficult term, too). Maybe discuss this?

As I write in Lakens, 2019: "In line with the general tendency to weigh Type 1 error rates (the probability of obtaining a statistically significant result when there is no true effect) as more serious than Type 2 error rates (the probability of obtaining a non-significant result when there is a true effect), publications that discuss preregistration have often been more concerned with inflated Type 1 error rates than with low power.
However, in situations where researchers want to find a null effect low power is a bigger concern."
The idea of null-hacking is not crazy - sometimes a certain variable should *not* be significant to exclude alternative explanations. Therefore, preregistration certainly should have the function to prevent researchers from incorrectly claiming there is no effect, when there is an effect, by inflating the Type 2 error rate (or equivalently, by reducing the power).

> Absolutely. However, note that our H is always the research hypothesis, independent of the statistical H1 or H0.
> If a researcher wants to provide evidence for a null hypothesis, this is their H, theoretical risk, then is related to power.

> > From the revised paper:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> We tried to clarify this in our revision:
```

But this latter statement dismisses the important role of power much too easily.
One could just as well say it is 'common sense' to reduce the Type 1 error rate.
Furthermore, once again, we do not 'increase' error rates, we *control* them.

> Perhaps, we are a bit daft but a clear definition of error rate control eludes us.
> We are under the impression that two competing definitions are used here from time to time.
> First, a definition in which control means the error rates are known (but then known by whom?).
> Second, control means ensuring certain acceptable bounds of error rates are not exceeded.

And while controlling them, we always have to consider resource constraints (Lakens, 2022).
Indeed, one might even say that we are always balancing Type 1 and Type 2 error rates, and that it would be sensible to move away from a fixed alpha level for all studies (Maier and Lakens, 2022).
In any case, the authors fail to adequately argue why power can be ignored, and the Type 1 error rate is important.

> > We can not deliver a treaty on statistical inference as a whole.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> We can not deliver a treaty on statistical inference as a whole.
```

Remove sentence

> Nowhere have we stated that power can be ignored for statistical inference; we just do not think that power is the main reason why preregistration is a good thing.
> We agree that detectability is important; after all, it shows in every mathematical consideration we made that it is a vital consideration for a Bayesian.

According to the error-statistical justification of preregistration (Mayo, 2018; Lakens, 2019) both are equally important.
At the very least, increasing the alpha level would also increase the statistical power, so the two can not even be seen as separate. 

> > We wholeheartedly agree with the importance of being able to navigate these tradeoffs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> We wholeheartedly agree with the importance of being able to navigate these tradeoffs.
```

We should cite the suggested papers here when we make this argument

> The point of not using a Type 1 error rate is to differentiate the statistical test from the the researcher's scientific judgement.
> Type 1 error rate is a property of a test under certain conditions.
> Theoretical risk refers to the individual judgement of a researcher about the substantive hypothesis and the study design as a whole.

The authors say they borrowed the term 'theoretical risk' from Meehl, but that he did not assign it to (¬\|¬).
The authors cite Kukla (1990), but after reading it, I am not convinced they are correct in equating 'theoretical risk' with the Type 1 error rate.
Theoretical risk means making an a-priori unlikely prediction if the theory was not true.

> This sentence sounds exactly like P(¬E|¬H) to us.
> The judgement about P(¬E|¬H) is a-priori, is about "prediction" as a statement about evidence E, given that the theory is not true (¬H).
> One might argue, that it should be multiplied by ¬H perhaps? 
> But that would not change any of the arguments.
> In any case, we provide clear mathematical definitions for our terms.

> > If a reader does not agree with our terminology, they are free to term them differently.

Reviewer: I don't like the tone of that argument here. Terms should be well grounded (but I think they are).

> Yes, indeed, this could all have low theoretical risk.
> We could include the disclaimer to the examples on p. 13 "Note that the three tests differ in theoretical risk even when they are tested with the same Type 1 error rate."

This is another reason why I think the term 'theoretical risk' is not a good choice.
Indeed, based on the example on page 13, it seems the authors themselves confuse real theoretical risk with Type 1 error control.
However, it is better to use terminology that encompasses Type 1 and Type 2 errors (such as 'the probability that a test will falsify a hypothesis', or even better: the *severity* of a test).

> Different philosophies differ in their terminology.
> Deborah Mayo has good reasons to differentiate Type 1 error rate from severity, as do we.

Using the term 'severity of the test' would also embed the work more strongly in philosophy of science (and specifically the work of Mayo, as she builds on Popper).

> This would embed us in a different philosophy of science.

> > Popper is the most famous anti-inductionist; we deliver an inductionist account.

Reviewer: I believe that really here the core difference in lines of reasonings becomes apparent. It's really all about adressing this very fundamental issue. I think that this point should be adressed very early on both in the responses to the reviewer as well as in the manuscript.

I would pick another terminology.
In our own work published in Psychological Methods we called this "the marginal gain in expected utility (or usefulness) of scientific claims". (Isager, P. M., van Aert, R. C. M., Bahník, Š., Brandt, M. J., DeSoto, K. A., Giner-Sorolla, R., Krueger, J. I., Perugini, M., Ropovik, I., van 't Veer, A. E., Vranka, M., & Lakens, D. (2023).
Deciding what to replicate: A decision model for replication study selection under resource and knowledge constraints. Psychological Methods, 28(2), 438-451. [https://doi.org/10.1037/met0000438)/](https://doi.org/10.1037/met0000438)/){.uri}.
There are probably other existing terms for the same idea in the literature. The authors discuss P(E\|H) as 'detectability' or the probability of detecting evidence if a hypothesis holds.
This is thus simply statistical power, or the true positive rate.
I think the term detectability is not particularly useful, as it is more strongly associated with signal detection theory - but that is not what the authors mean with the term, as they admit the term is simply statistical power when applied to hypothesis testing (and I don't know what else it could be applied to).

> > Hypothesis testing and scientific inference are different things.

Reviewer: Still, I think it would be good to discuss all suggested terms in the paper and as to how they relate to our terms.

> We meant "ideal" in the sense of a physicist talking about ideal gas.

But in an ideal estimation process we would also have infinite data.
Maybe I am being too pragmatic, but shouldn't we discuss how research is actually done?

> We agree to assume infinite data would go a little too far into wishful thinking.
> Also, with infinite data, it stops being fun to apply Bayesian reasoning since there is no uncertainty to deal with.

The authors write "Indeed, limiting the type-I error rate is commonly stated as the central goal of preregistration (Nosek et al., 2018; Oberauer, 2019; Rubin, 2020)."
It might be commonly stated. But then, people also commonly state the incorrect definition of a p-value.
Instead, the authors could cite a better paper, like my own: "The goal of preregistration is not simply to control the Type 1 error rate in hypothesis tests, but to prevent researchers from non-transparently reducing the capacity of the test to falsify a prediction in general."
I worked quite hard on conceptually clarifying the role of preregistration, correcting exactly the kind of misconception the authors also respond against.

> > We appreciate this hard work; we just do not think it is quite done yet.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> We appreciate this hard work. 
Yet we believe that this is not the only useful perspective on the utility of preregistration.
```
